Pouring, running and visualizing gels

Prepare a small bottle of 1% agarose in 0.5X TBE buffer by adding 1g agarose / 100mL 0.5X TBE. Swirl and microwave until the agarose is melted. Prepare the gel tray and allow the bottle to cool until you can hold it comfortably in a gloved hand. 

Add 1uL EtBr / 100mL 1% agarose in 0.5X TBE and swirl. EtBr is a mutagen, handle carefully. Pour your gel(s) and allow to cool ~20 minutes. Gels can be stored up to ~2 weeks in your 4°C fridge by removing them from the tray and wrapping neatly in cling-wrap. 

To run a gel, place the gel (inside its tray) in a gel box and fill the box with 0.5X TBE until it just covers the gel. Add loading dye to the samples to be run, and pipet these into the wells of the gel, reserving the first well for the ladder. For 1kb ladder, use 1-2ul, for 100bp ladder, use 5ul. Place the lid on the gel box, and connect the leads to the power supply. Time and voltage necessary will depend on the size and degree of resolution required for your DNA, but 30 minutes at 100V is typical for most PCR products.

When the run is complete, turn off the power supply and disconnect the leads from the box. Remove the lid and carefully transfer the gel to the UV box. Do not touch the outside of the gel box with contaminated gloves. To image your gel, run the Image Lab software from the desktop, click "New Protocol", and select "Nucleic Acid" > "Ethidium Bromide" from the drop down list. When prompted, ensure that the filter indicator at the top of the UV box is set to the correct filter. Click "Position gel" to view the position of the gel in the lightbox - at this point it is safe to open the door and adjust the gel position by hand. Adjust the zoom level of the camera so that the entire gel is visible in the viewing area. Ensure the UV box is completely closed, then click "Run Program" to capture your image. Various image adjustments can be made within the Image Lab software - feel free to play around with settings to see what they do. Images printed using the default settings will be printed on the HP laser Jet in the side room. Note that clicking "Save" will only allow you to save in a proprietary format which can only be opened with Image Lab software. To save your file as a jpg, tif or other image format, click "File" > "Export", navigate to your folder, select your image type from the drop down, and save the image. After imaging, wipe down the tray of the UV light box with ddH2O, empty the running buffer from the gel rig, and clean up the gel area and assorted supplies.
